---
title: IITs and Our Media
date: 2025-01-30T05:51:46.993Z
genre: "Life "
readTime: "5 min "
thumbnail: /images/life-iitsandourmedia.png
---
Few days ago, I read about an IITian Baba in Mahakumbh. The media was gaga over it with his photographs and stories about his education, childhood, family etc. Today,  there is another IITian Baba who is cooking food for the pilgrims. 
I fail to understand why media is so excited any news related to IIT? Somehow media has developed a bias towards IITs.  True, they are the premier educational institutes in our country and only academically brilliant people can crack the entrance tests. Since the students are sharp in their studies, and the environment in side the institute is stimulating, those students would get the top jobs in the country or admission into top universities for higher studies. That doesn't mean that IITians only are the bright people. There are several other educational institutes and universities, which produce engineers who are also exceptionally meritorious. As per Google,  IITs produce about 25000 graduates in an year,  while the total Engineering graduates produced in the country are 1.5 million! The graduates from other than IITs are also occupying higher corporate positions.  In fact the present CEOs of Microsoft and Adobe,  who studied in India are not from IITs. In real life we all would have seen some IITians who are dull and uninspiring where as some people from other institutes who are quite innovative and intelligent. 

All of us are guided by destiny. People who are academically not so good could be more successful in life whereas academically bright people may face failures in their lives. Once graduated, the life of person can turn any way based on his choice be it a job, a profession, a higher study, a totally different branch of study.Later in their life they could become a writer, an entrepreneur, an agriculturist, a politician, a teacher etc. Many might have turned to spirituality also irrespective of their academic background. Why media is projecting the Sadhus who have IIT background specially, as if it is a wonder of the world? Instead media should have gathered details of their experience in the spiritual field and how it is useful to our society. For decades this media hype about IITs has created a false prestige among IITians. Recently I read a news item that in some corporates there is a clear divide between IITians and non IITians in terms of incentives and career progression. If it is true, it is definitely a wrong practice. Moreover, the craze for IITs among the parents is resulting in pressurising their children to get admission into IITs. Children who failed to crack the exam are likely to develop a sense of frustration and depression throughout their life.      

Compared to the past, numerous opportunities are available in various fields and parents should realise that nothing is lost if their ward fails go to IIT. Our media too should stop glorifying IITs. In stead they should bring the success stories of non IITians too, which would definitely inspire the public and more and more success stories would emerge from them.   

(N. Bala Subrahmanyam )